Let's go through an overview of the tools
we will be using in this course.
After this video you will be
able to describe what KNIME is.
Describe what Spark MLlib is, and contrast
KNIME and MLlib as machine learning tools.
The machine learning tools that we will
be using in this course are KNIME and
Spark MLlib.
These are both open source tools.
This lecture will introduce
these tools to you.
You will need to use them for
the hands on activities in this course.
KNIME Analytics is a platform for data
analytics, reporting, and visualization.
The KNIME platform uses a graphical user
interface based approach with drag and
drop features to facilitate
constructing an analytic solution.
The basic components in KNIME
are referred to as nodes.
Each node provides
a specific functionalities,
such as reading in a file,
creating a specific type of machine
running model and generating a plot.
Nodes can be connected to create
machine running workflows or pipelines.
KNIME stands for
Konstanz Information Miner.
The Konstanz is for
the University of Konstanz in Germany.
And note that the K in KNIME is
silent in the pronunciation.
In KNIME you assemble the steps that
need to be performed in a machine
learning process by connecting
nodes to create a workflow.
To create a workflow the user
chooses the appropriate nodes
from the node repository and
assembles them into a workflow.
The workflow can then be
executed in the KNIME work bench.
A node implements a specific
operation in a workflow.
In this screenshot we see two nodes.
The file reader node is used to
read data from a text file or
a URL or a web address.
The decision tree learner node
builds a decision tree model.
Each node can have input and output ports
and can be connected to other nodes.
When a node is executed,
it takes data from its input port,
performs some operations on the data and
writes the results to the output port.
Data is transferred between
nodes that are connected.
A node can be configured by opening
up its configuration dialog.
This is where the parameters for
the node can be set.
The Node Repository is where you will find
all the nodes available in your KNIME
installation.
The nodes are organized by categories.
KNIME provides an array of nodes to
perform operations for data access,
data manipulation, analysis,
visualization, and reporting.
As you can see, KNIME provides
a visual approach to machine learning.
It's GUI-based, drag-and-drop approach
provides an easy way to create and
execute a machine learning workflow.
The open source version of KNIME however
is limited in how large of a dataset
it can handle.
There are commercial extensions to
KNIME to manage large datasets and
offer other extra functionalities, but
these extensions are not open source.
Now let's talk about Spark MLlib.
You've worked with Spark before if
you took the third course in this
specialization on big data.
Spark is a distributed computing platform.
MLlib is a scalable machine learning
library that runs on top of Spark.
It provides distributed implementations of
commonly used machine learning algorithms
and utilities.
The ML and MLlib of course stands for
machine learning.
To implement machine learning operations
in Spark MLlib, you need to write code.
So MLlib is not a GUI-based approach.
This segment of code reads and
parses data from a file,
then builds a decision
tree classification model.
MLlib, as with the base Spark core,
provides an application programming
interface, or API, for
Java, Python, Scala and R.
This means that you can write code in
these programming languages to execute
the base operations provided in Spark.
Spark MLlib runs on
a distributed platform.
It provides machine
learning algorithms and
techniques that are implemented
using distributed processing.
So MLlib is used for processing and
analyzing large datasets.
And as we have discussed, writing code is
required to implement operations in MLlib.
In summary, KNIME is a GUI-based machine
learning tool, while Spark MLlib provides
a programming-based scalable platform for
processing very large datasets.
You will be using both Spark MLlib and
KNIME throughout this course.
We have readings and hands-on exercises to
help you get familiar with these popular
open source tools for machine learning.
I think you will find it very informative
and fun to work with these tools.